In what has been the bloodiest election campaign in US history, Joe Biden is finally set to take office as the 46th President of the United States in 24 hours, in the midst of unprecedented levels of security that the country has been forced into, thanks to outgoing President Donald Trump, a sore loser who broke boundaries, legal and moral in swaying his followers into believing election lies.

Most of us might think - it's the US - it doesn't affect me. But it does - the fact that an authoritarian leader with no respect for office, who was pandering to extremist hate groups and dictators could come so close to winning re-election gives us food for thought about the state of the world. And close, he did come. Around 156 million people voted in the US - 81.4 million for Biden, 74.4 million for Trump. But that's the larger statistic, and as we know, the popular vote doesn't determine the President. The US President is determined by the Electoral college votes he receives, that is, the number of states won, and the electoral weightage given to each state. 

Most states are usually pretty strongly leaning to either side, and usually don't determine election outcome - California, New York, Washington etc for the Democrats, Wyoming, Idaho, Kentucky etc for the Republicans. This time, the outcome was determined by the states of Georgia, Arizona, Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania - the states with the closest margins, all of which Joe Biden won narrowly to clinch the presidency.


Three states with the closest absolute margins - Georgia by 11800 votes, Arizona by 10900 votes and Wisconsin by 21000 votes gave Biden the victory - a total of less than 43000 votes out of 156 million total votes cast - had half of these gone to the other side- that's quite a point to realize. 

And the reason I find it so astounding is to look at Trump's record - his handling of the pandemic was a massive failure, he's pulled out of most international agreements and sided with dictators like Jong Un of North Korea, Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman of Saudi Arabia, and most significantly, Vladimir Putin of Russia, he has sown divisiveness at every turn in his presidency and supported far right extremist hate groups, made vulgar, racist and fascist comments, appointed family members and arch allies to positions of power - and yet it was this man who came within 20000 votes of being given control of the most dangerous nuclear arsenal of the world and the torch of democracy. 

The only area a slight majority of the country agree he's done a good job with, is the economy - he gets 51% approval for handling of the economy - and it was this mere factor that almost got him reelected. 